---
layout: page
title: Practice Exam 2
permalink: /exams/practice-exam2
---

### Directions
Solve the following problems and type up your solutions.  
In the actual exam, you will be allowed scratch paper and a pencil, but no calculator or note sheet.

**Problem 1:** True or False!  Write TRUE if the statement is true and FALSE if the statement is false.  For practice, try to also supply a brief justification.

* (A) A topological space $$X$$ is compact if given any family $$\{C_i: i\in I\}$$ of subsets of $$X$$ with the finite intersection property, $$\bigcap_{i\in I} C_i \neq \varnothing$$.
* (B) Let $$X$$ be compact.  Then for any real-valued function $$f$$ on $$X$$, there exists $$a\in X$$ such that $$f(a) \geq f(x)$$ for all $$x\in X$$.
* (C) Zorn's lemma is equivalent to the Axiom of Choice.
* (D) If $$A$$ is dense in $$\mathbb R$$ (Euclidean topology), then the complement $$A'$$ cannot be dense in $$\mathbb R$$.
* (E) If $$\gamma$$ is a subbase for a topology $$\tau$$, then every element in $$\tau$$ is a union of elements of $$\gamma$$.

**Problem 2:** Definitions!  On the exam, you will be responsible for remembering many different definitions.  Here is a non-exhaustive list:

topological space, topology, open sets, trivial topology, discrete topology, cofinite topology, metrizable, subspace, relative topology, continuous, open mapping, homeomorphism, homeomorphic, Zariski topology, open neighborhood interior, closed, closure, dense, limit point, derived set, isolated point, boundary point, boundary, open base, basic open sets, separable, second countable space, Lindelof space, open cover, open subcover, Sorgenfrey line, open subbase, generating set, weaker (coarser) topology, stronger (finer) topology, poset, comparable, incomparable, complete lattice, supremum, infimum, weak topology generated by family of functions, compact space, compact set, finite intersection property, projection maps, product topology, direct product, maximal element of a poset, upper bound, chain

**Problem 3:** Named theorems!  On the exam, you will be responsible for remembering many important named theorems.  Here is a non-exhaustive list:

Lindelof Theorem, Alexander Subbase Theorem, Heine-Borel Theorem, Zorn's Lemma, Tychonoff Theorem

**Problem 4:** 

* (A) Give an example of a subspace of a metric space which is closed and bounded, but which is not compact.
* (B) Give an example of a topological space which is Lindelof but not second countable.
* (C) Give an example of a topological space which is not metrizable.
* (D) Give an example of two metric spaces which are homeomorphic as topological spaces.


**Problem 5:**

Remember that a **topological property** of a topological space $$X$$ is a property that is satisfied by every topological space $$Y$$ which is homeomorphic to $$X$$.

* (A) Prove that compactness is a topological property
* (B) Prove that second countability is a topological property
* (C) Prove that Lindelof is a topological property
* (D) Prove that completeness is a topological property
* (E) Prove that metrizable is a topological property

**Problem 6:**

Let $$X$$ be a set with the cofinite topology.  Prove that $$X$$ is compact.

**Problem 7:**

Let $$X = \mathbb{Z}$$ and $$Y = \mathbb{Q}$$ be topological subspaces of $$\mathbb{R}$$, with the Euclidean topology.  Prove or disprove: $$X$$ and $$Y$$ are homeomorphic.

**Problem 8:**

You are walking in the forest at 2AM.  While passing a magical pond, a toad jumps out at you and croaks that if $$f: [0,1]\rightarrow \mathbb R$$ is a real-valued function whose range is $$[0,1)$$, then $$f$$ cannot be continuous.  In such an important situation, you only have three options:
* use the theorems we learned in class to carefully prove the toad is right;
* come up with a counter-example;
* or carefully back away from the toad and get this problem wrong.

Assume the toad is a friend of Euclid, so they only care about the Euclidean topology.


