---
layout: page
title: Comparing Topologies
---

**Additional reading:** Simmons 3.19

As we have already seen, a set $$X$$ has many different potential topologies we can put upon it.
At one extreme, we have a topology with as few sets as possible, namely the *trivial topology* $$\{\varnothing,X\}$$.
At the other extreme, we have the *discrete topology* consisting of the power set of $$X$$.
In this section, we discuss the topologies in between in more detail.

### Weaker and stronger topologies

**Definition:**  Let $$\tau_1$$ and $$\tau_2$$ be two different topologies on a set $$X$$.  When $$\tau_1\subseteq \tau_2$$, we say that $$\tau_1$$ is **weaker** or **coarser** than $$\tau_2$$ and that $$\tau_2$$ is **stronger** or **finer** than $$\tau_1$$.
The trivial topology is the **weakest topology** on $$X$$ and the discrete topology is the **strongest topology** on $$X$$.

**Theorem:** Let $$X$$ be a set and suppose that $$\tau_1$$ and $$\tau_2$$ are topologies on $$X$$.  Then the identity map $$f: (X,\tau_1)\rightarrow (X,\tau_2)$$ is continuous if and only if $$\tau_2$$ is weaker than $$\tau_1$$.

**Problem:** True or False.  Given any two topologies, $$\tau_1$$ and $$\tau_2$$ one topology must be stronger than the other.
<details>
  <summary>Solution.</summary>
  False!  Just like two sets need not be subsets of one another, two topologies may not be directly comparable.
</details>

The set $$\mathbf{Top}(X)$$ of all topologies on a set $$X$$ is well-defined, since it can be viewed as a subset of the power set of the power set of $$X$$, ie. a subset of $$\mathcal P(\mathcal P(X))$$.  The notion of stronger and weaker topologies above makes $$\mathbf{Top}(X)$$ into a **partially ordered set** or **poset**.
A poset is a set with a **partial order** $$\leq$$ which allows us to compare *some* elements, but not all elements.  Elements which can be compared are called **comparable**, and are otherwise called **incomparable**.  If $$P$$ is a poset, then the partial order $$\leq$$ satisfies the following properties:
* reflexivity: every element is comparable to itself and $$a\leq a$$
* antisymmetry: if $$a$$ and $$b$$ are comparable elements and $$a\leq b$$ and $$b\leq a$$ then $$a=b$$
* transitivity: if $$a$$ and $$b$$ are comparable elements with $$a\leq b$$, and $$b$$ and $$b$$ and $$c$$ are comparable elements with $$b\leq c$$, then $$a$$ and $$c$$ are comparable elements and $$a\leq c$$.

Posets arise very naturally all over the place in mathematics!  Comparing topologies is just one of a great many examples!  Other examples include:
* the set of positive integers with partial order defined by divisibility;
* the set of subspaces of a vector space with partial order defined by inclusion;
* the set $$\mathbb R^2$$ with the relation $$(a,b)\leq (c,d)$$ if and only if $$a\leq c$$ and $$b\leq d$$;
* the set of closed subsets of a topological space $$X$$ under inclusion;
* the set of open subsets of a topological space $$X$$ under inclusion;

The set $$\mathbf{Top}(X)$$ is not just any poset.
It is a special kind of poset called a **complete lattice**, ie. a poset where every collection of elements has both a supremum (or join) and an infimum (or meet).  Given a poset $$P$$ and a subset $$Q\subseteq P$$, the **supremum** $$\vee Q$$ (when it exists) is the element of $$P$$ satisfying
* $$x\leq \vee Q$$ for all $$x\in P$$ and if $$y\in P$$ satisfies $$x\leq y$$ for all $$x\in Q$$ then $$\vee Q\leq x$$
Likewise the **infimum** $$\wedge Q$$ is the element of $$P$$ satisfying
* $$\wedge Q\leq x$$ for all $$x\in Q$$ and if $$y\in P$$ satisfies $$y\leq x$$ for all $$x\in Q$$ then $$y\leq \wedge Q$$.

Actually, we've already seen examples of infima and suprema on the down low!

**Example:**  Let $$X$$ be a topological space and let $$P$$ be the poset of all open subsets of $$X$$.  Fix a subset $$A\subseteq X$$ and let $$Q\subseteq P$$ be the set of all elements of $$P$$ which are subsets of $$A$$.  Then the supremum $$\vee Q$$ of $$Q$$ is the interior of $$Q$$.

**Example:**  Let $$X$$ be a topological space and let $$P$$ be the poset of all closed subsets of $$X$$.  Fix a subset $$A\subseteq X$$ and let $$Q\subseteq P$$ be the set of all elements of $$P$$ which are supersets of $$A$$.  Then the infimum $$\wedge Q$$ of $$Q$$ is the closure of $$A$$.

The next theorem shows us that $$\mathbf{Top}(X)$$ with its partial ordering is a complete lattice.

**Theorem:**  Let $$Q = \{\tau_i: i\in I\}$$ be a collection of subspaces of $$\mathbf{Top}(X)$$.  Then $$\bigcap_i \tau_i$$ is also a topology on $$X$$ and is the infimum of $$Q$$, ie. the strongest topology weaker than $$\tau_i$$ for all $$i\in I$$.
The set $$\bigcup_{i\in I}\tau_i$$ is a subbasis for the supremum of $$Q$$, ie. the weakest topology stronger than $$\tau_i$$ for all $$i\in I$$.

### Topologies generated by functions

Above we called some topologies stronger and some weaker.
This type of vocabulary can be a bit misleading the first time that you see it.
In many typical situations, stronger means better, but here this is not the case!
For the "strongest" topology, every function is continuous so the topology doesn't really tell us anything.
It's like that quote from the bad guy in Pixar's *The Incredibles*: if everyone is special, no one will be.
Practically speaking, we want to work with a topology that makes the functions we like continuous and the functions we don't like discontinuous.

**Example:**  Under the trivial topology on $$\mathbb{C}$$, the only continuous functions are constant functions.

**Example:**  Under the cofinite topology on $$\mathbb{C}$$, any polynomial is continuous.  However, functions like $$\sin(z)$$ or $$e^z$$ are not continuous, even though we would have considered these continuous based on our prior experience in calculus.

**Example:**  Under the Euclidean topology on $$\mathbb{C}$$ (ie. the one inhereted from the metric $$d(z,w) = \lvert z-w \rvert$$), polynomials are continuous, as are functions like $$\sin(z)$$ or $$e^z$$ and all the other usual functions.  However, the functions that we would usually not consider to be continuous in calculus are also not continuous here.

As we can see from the previous examples, the topology can be tailored to focus on particular flavors of functions.  This leads to topologies generated by families of functions.  We start with a single function $$f: X\rightarrow Y$$ from a set $$X$$ to a topological space $$Y$$.

**Lemma:** The set $$\tau = \{f^{-1}(V): V\subseteq Y\ \text{open}\}$$ is a topology on $$X$$ and under this topology $$f: X\rightarrow Y$$ is continuous.  Furthermore, $$\tau$$ is the weakest topology on $$X$$ making $$f$$ continuous.

**Definition:** Let $$X$$ be a set and let $$f_i: X\rightarrow Y_i$$ be a function from $$X$$ to some topological space $$Y_i$$ for all $$i$$ in some indexing set $$I$$.  The **weak topology generated by** $$\{f_i\}$$ is the supremum of the collection of topologies $$\{\tau_i: i\in I\}$$ where $$\tau_i = \{f_i^{-1}(V): V\subseteq Y_i\ \text{open}\}.$$

**Theorem:** The weak topology generated by $$\{f_i\}$$ is the weakest topology with the property that $$f_i$$ is continuous for all $$i$$.

**Example:** Let $$X=\mathbb{R}$$ with the cofinite topology.  The topology on $$\mathbb R^n$$ generated by all polynomial functions $$f: \mathbb R^n\rightarrow X$$ is the Zariski topology on $$\mathbb R^n$$.


