---
layout: page
title: Product topology
---

**Additional reading:** Simmons 4.22

Given a pair of topological spaces $$X_1$$ and $$X_2$$, the Cartesian product $$X_1\times X_2$$ can be made into a topological space in a natural way.
In this section, we explain the nature of the topology on the product space, for both finite and infinite products.


### Products of two spaces

Suppose that $$X_1$$ and $$X_2$$ are topological spaces.
The Cartesian product $$X_1\times X_2$$ comes with two natural maps $$\pi_1$$ and $$\pi_2$$, called **projections**, defined by

$$\pi_i X_1\times X_2\rightarrow X_i,\quad \pi_i(x_1,x_2) = x_i\quad\text{for}\ i=1,2.$$

Intuitively, these maps are something akin to identity maps which forget part of the information and thus should be continuous.
This hints at what subsets of the product topology should be open: the ones which make the projections continuous!

Suppose that $$V_i\subseteq X_i$$ is an open set.
In order for $$\pi_i$$ to be continuous, the preimage $$\pi_i^{-1}(V_i)$$ of $$V_i$$ must be open.
The preimages are

$$\begin{align}
\pi_1^{-1}(V_1) &= V_1\times X_2;\\
\pi_2^{-1}(V_2) &= X_1\times V_2,
\end{align}$$

so this shows that the sets $$V_1\times X_2$$ and $$X_1\times V_2$$ must be open.
Intersections of open sets must be open, so it follows that

$$V_1\times V_2 = (V_1\times X_2)\cap (X_1\times V_2)$$

must also be open for all pairs of open sets $$V_1\subseteq X_1$$ and $$V_2\subseteq X_2$$.

**Theorem:**  The collection of all sets of the form

$$\{V_1\times V_2: V_i\subseteq X_i\ \text{open}\}$$

forms a basis for a topology on $$X_1\times X_2$$.

**Definition:** The topology on $$X_1\times X_2$$ defined by the previous theorem is called the **product topology** on $$X_1\times X_2$$.

**Question:** True or false: if $$V$$ is an open subset of $$X_1\times X_2$$, then $$V = V_1\times V_2$$ for some open subsets $$V_1\subseteq X_1$$ and $$V_2\subseteq X_2$$.
<details>
  <summary>reveal solution</summary>
  False!  Instead it will be a union of sets of that form.
</details>
<br/>

Since this topology is exactly the weakest topology making the projection maps continuous, we see this is exactly the weak topology on $$X_1\times X_2$$ generated by the projection maps.


### Arbitrary products

Now how about if we want to define a topology on the product $$X_1\times X_2\times X_3$$?
We can view this as a product of the *two* spaces $$(X_1\times X_2)$$ and $$X_3$$.
This means open sets will look like products of opens in $$X_1\times X_2$$ and $$X_3$$, which for example could look like $$V_1\times V_2\times V_3$$ for some open subsets $$V_i\subseteq X_i$$.
In fact, this again is a basis a topology on $$X_1\times X_2\times X_3$$.
This tells us how to define a basis for a topology on products in general.

Let $$\{X_i:i\in I\}$$ be an arbitrary collection of topological spaces, possibly infinite.
The **direct product** of this collection is the set of all tuples indexed by $$I$$

$$\prod_{i\in I} X_i = \{(x_i: i\in I) \mid\ x_i\in X_i,\ \forall i\in I\}.$$

For example, if $$I=\mathbb N$$ and $$X_i=\mathbb R$$ for all $$i$$, then $$\prod_{i\in I} X_i$$ consists of all real sequences $$(x_1,x_2,x_3,\dots).$$
This arbitrary product $$\prod_{i\in I}X_i$$ comes equipped with a collection of **projection maps** indexed by $$I$$

$$\pi_j: \prod_{i\in I} X_i\rightarrow X_j,\quad (x_i: I\in I)\mapsto x_j$$

The product topology on this product of sets is precisely the weak topology making all of these projection maps continuous.  A generic open set looks like $$\prod_{i\in I} V_i$$ with $$V_i\subseteq X_i$$ open for all $i$ and $$V_i=X_i$$ for all but finitely many $$i\in I$$.

**Theorem:** The collection of subsets of $$\prod_{i\in I} X_i$$ of the form $$\prod_{i\in I} V_i$$ with $$V_i\subseteq X_i$$ open for all $$i\in I$$ and $$V_i=X_i$$ for all but finitely many $$i\in I$$ is a basis for a topology on $$\prod_{i\in I} X_i$$.

**Definition:** The topology on $$\prod_{i\in I} X_i$$ defined by the previous theorem is called the **product topology** on $$X_i$$.


### Euclidean space

When we talk about Euclidean space, we really mean $$\mathbb R^n$$ with the topology induced as a normed vector space.  Which norm we take doesn't even matter!  We get the same topology in the end.
However, we just learned that there is another way to put a topology on $$\mathbb R^n$$, specifically the product topology.  A natural question is thus: how does the product topology on $$\mathbb R^n$$ compare with the Euclidean topology?

**Theorem:** The product topology on $$\mathbb R^n$$ is the same as the Euclidean topology on $$\mathbb R^n$$.

**Proof:** To prove that two topologies $$\tau_1$$ and $$\tau_2$$ on a set $$X$$ are the same, we need to show every open set in one is also open in the other.  To do so, it suffices to show that every set in a basis $$\beta_1$$ of $$\tau_1$$ belongs to $$\tau_2$$ and every set in a basis $$\beta_2$$ for $$\tau_2$$ belongs to $$\tau_1$$.
Since open intervals are a basis on $$\mathbb R$$, open rectangles $$\prod_{i=1}^n (a_i,b_i)$$ form a basis for the product topology on $$\mathbb R^n$$.
Likewise, open balls form a basis for the Euclidean topology, and if we use the sup norm, open balls consist of open cubes $$(a,b)^n$$.
Thus open balls are open rectangles and are open in the product topology.  Likewise, any open rectangle is a union of open squares and is thus open in the Euclidean topology.

### Products and compactness

One of the most important results about product topologies which we will prove later is Tychonoff's theorem, which relates products back to our notion of compactness.

**Tychonoff's Theorem:** Suppose that $$\{X_i: i\in I\}$$ is a collection of compact topological spaces.  Then the product space $$\prod_{i\in I} X_i$$ is also compact.

Using Tychonoff's Theorem, we can for example come up with a very slick proof of the Heine-Borel Theorem.

**Heine-Borel Theorem:** A subset of $$\mathbb R$$ with the Euclidean topology is compact if and only if it is closed and bounded.
**Proof:** Since $$\mathbb R$$ is metrizable, we know that any compact subset is both closed and bounded.  To prove the converse, suppose that $$C\subseteq \mathbb R$$ is closed and bounded.  Then $$C$$ is a closed subset of some closed interval $$[a,b]$$.  Thus if we can prove $$[a,b]$$ is compact, then $$C$$ will be a closed subset of a compact set and therefore compact also.

By rescaling, it suffices to prove that $$[0,1]$$ is compact.
To do so, let $$X_i = \{0,1\}$$ with the discrete topology and consider the function

$$\prod_{i=1}^\infty X_i\rightarrow [0,1],\quad (x_i: i\in \mathbb N)\mapsto \sum_{i=1}^\infty x_i2^{-i}.$$

This function is bijective and continuous.  Also $$X_i$$ is finite and hence compact for all $$i$$.  Thus by Tychonoff's theorem, $$\prod_{i=1}^\infty X_i$$ is compact.  Since the continuous image of a compact set is compact, it follows that $$[0,1]$$ is compact.



